paper/source/evaluation.md, before:


# Evaluation

For the limited subset of things that can be described in any of the competitor engines, we
evaluate the performance of `Reiz` by running similiar queries in Github Code Search \[@githubcodesearch\]
grep.app \[@grepapp\] and Krugle \[@krugle\] and report back the amount of true / false positives.

## Comparisons

The method of evaluation is running the queries and analyzing the top 10 results. Some engines offer
multiple matches per result, and they will be marked as true positive if any of them are a true
positive. We also discard match spans, since none of the competitors can successfully display the expression
boundaries.

Objective: search for a `len(...)` call

| engine               | query                          | true positives | false positives |
|----------------------|--------------------------------|----------------|-----------------|
| Github Code Search   | `language:python len()`        | 5              | 5               |
| grep.app             | `len\((.*)\)`                  | 10             | 0               |
| Krugle (advanced)    | `len functioncall:len`         | 10             | 0               |
| Reiz                 | `Call(Name("len"))`            | 10             | 0               |

Objective: search for an addition or a subtraction operation

| engine               | query                          | true positives | false positives |
|----------------------|--------------------------------|----------------|-----------------|
| Github Code Search   | `language:python + -`          | 0              | 0               |
| Krugle (fuzzy)       | `expr + expr` / `expr - expr`  | 0              | 0               |
| Krugle (solr syntax) | `\+ \-`                        | 2              | 8               |
| Krugle (regex syntax)| `(.*)(\+\|\-)(.*)`             | 1              | 9               |
| grep.app             | `(.*)(\+\|\-)(.*)`             | 2              | 8               |
| Reiz                 | `BinOp(op=Add() \| Sub())`     | 10             | 0               |

Objective: search for a return statement that returns a tuple `return ..., ...`

| engine               | query                          | true positives | false positives |
|----------------------|--------------------------------|----------------|-----------------|
| Github Code Search   | `language:python return ,`     | 2              | 8               |
| Krugle (solr syntax) | `return \,`                    | 1              | 9               |
| Krugle (regex syntax)| `return ((.*))(,\s*(.*))+`     | 0              | 10              |
| grep.app             | `return ((.*))(,\s*(.*))+`     | 0              | 10              |
| grep.app (2)         | `return \(((.*))(,\s*(.*))+\)` | 9              | 1               |
| Reiz                 | `Return(Tuple())`              | 10             | 0               |

Commit message:

docs, paper: work about suggestions
docs:
- Add a QA section to the docs to mention about source of data
- Add the new performance evaluation section to the docs, also the benchmark script itself
- Add the new related projects section to cite/mention about related projects

paper:
- Drop the 'at scale' suffix from the title
- Mention about Reiz being the execution engine compared to others being public platforms
- Directly show the ReizQL, and also give an example about IRun language
- Change the statement of need to reflect how reiz solves
- Add a conclusion section to the evaluation about why reiz is able to get the score

paper/source/evaluation.md, after:


# Evaluation

For the limited subset of things that can be described in any of the competitor engines, we
evaluate the performance of `Reiz` by running similiar queries in Github Code Search \[@githubcodesearch\]
grep.app \[@grepapp\] and Krugle \[@krugle\] and report back the amount of true / false positives. Each
result that contains an exact match with the intended objective, e.g a call to `len(...)` function will
be counted as a true positive, and otherwise will be counted as a false positive.  Some engines offer
multiple matches per result, and they will be marked as true positive if any of them checks out with
the objective. We also discard match spans, since none of the competitors can successfully display
the expression boundaries.

Objective: search for a `len(...)` call

| engine               | query                          | true positives | false positives |
|----------------------|--------------------------------|----------------|-----------------|
| Github Code Search   | `language:python len()`        | 5              | 5               |
| grep.app             | `len\((.*)\)`                  | 10             | 0               |
| Krugle (advanced)    | `len functioncall:len`         | 10             | 0               |
| Reiz                 | `Call(Name("len"))`            | 10             | 0               |

Objective: search for an addition or a subtraction operation

| engine               | query                          | true positives | false positives |
|----------------------|--------------------------------|----------------|-----------------|
| Github Code Search   | `language:python + -`          | 0              | 0               |
| Krugle (fuzzy)       | `expr + expr` / `expr - expr`  | 0              | 0               |
| Krugle (solr syntax) | `\+ \-`                        | 2              | 8               |
| Krugle (regex syntax)| `(.*)(\+\|\-)(.*)`             | 1              | 9               |
| grep.app             | `(.*)(\+\|\-)(.*)`             | 2              | 8               |
| Reiz                 | `BinOp(op=Add() \| Sub())`     | 10             | 0               |

Objective: search for a return statement that returns a tuple `return ..., ...`

| engine               | query                          | true positives | false positives |
|----------------------|--------------------------------|----------------|-----------------|
| Github Code Search   | `language:python return ,`     | 2              | 8               |
| Krugle (solr syntax) | `return \,`                    | 1              | 9               |
| Krugle (regex syntax)| `return ((.*))(,\s*(.*))+`     | 0              | 10              |
| grep.app             | `return ((.*))(,\s*(.*))+`     | 0              | 10              |
| grep.app (2)         | `return \(((.*))(,\s*(.*))+\)` | 9              | 1               |
| Reiz                 | `Return(Tuple())`              | 10             | 0               |


## Conclusion

On all three objectives, Reiz got all the matches as true-positive due to it's nature of
being able to leverage syntax trees as well as other annotations that it could collect at
pre-processing stage (such as node boundaries to report the exact location) unlike others
where the source code is exercised like a regular textual document.
