paper/paper.md, before:

---
title: 'Reiz: Structural Source Code Search'
tags:
    - Python
    - source code search
    - big code
    - structure analysis
authors:
    - name: Batuhan Taskaya
      affiliation: 1
affiliations:
    - name: Python Core Developer
      index: 1

date: 21 March 2021
bibliography: paper.bib
---
# Summary

Reiz is a structural source code search engine that can execute queries written
in ReizQL to retrieve partially known syntactical constructs inside a
pre-processed source index.

# Statement of need

The fact that developers search source code every day is undeniable. This need
to search has various reasons by different groups of people. When introducing
new features to a language, developers often need to see what kind of an impact
that those will have before actually bothering to implement it (or even
discuss it in the first place). Prior to making any changes on a publicly
facing API, maintainers of those libraries do the pre-requisite work of
collecting samples and estimating the ramifications that operation might cause.
When the documentation of a framework doesn't sustain the curiosity, searching
for a structure (e.g a function, a constant) to see how it can be utilized in
real-world software is a common need among developers \[@developersearch2017\].

For the problems mentioned above, we present Reiz. A source code search engine
backend that can exercise queries to match syntax trees in order to leverage
the existing language syntax to describe partial knowledge (e.g a searching for
a `try`/ `finally` construct without knowing what is under the `try` block).

# State of the field

Popular source code search engines (e.g Github Code Search
\[@githubcodesearch\]) uses full-text search where the code is behaved not much
different than a regular textual document. Even though this approach works for
some basic queries, structurally it can't go further than matching token
sequences. This often causes seeing irrelevant search results on complex
queries, or even not being able to express the search itself in a purely
textual form. In the past, there has been some work done regarding making
queries more expressive through regular expressions (one example might
codesearch.debian.net \[@debiancodesearch\]), and even annotating the result
set with some semantical and structural knowledge (via finding and resolving
API names \[@BAJRACHARYA2014241\]).

# Method

![Stages from the Reiz's pipeline.](internals.png)

The internals consists of a pipeline that enables the ability to plug in and
out different components, such as for frontends of different languages. The
primary piece that every other component directly or indirectly interacts with
is the Index DB (a.k.a source warehouse) where the serialized AASTs (Annotated
Abstract Syntax Trees) are being held. It is based on an EdgeDB \[@edgedb\]
instance which interprets the compiled queries and returns the raw result set.
The schema used in the Index DB is in the format of ESDL (EdgeDB Schema
Definition Language) and automatically generated from the host language's ASDL
\[@asdl97\] declaration. It is a common format used by many different projects,
most notably by CPython itself.

## Sampling Source Code

The source code sampling starts with the collection of the most used python
packages, according to the download statistics over the PyPI
\[@hugovankemenade_richardsi_2021\]. The list then gets cross-linked to the
project's corresponding source control platforms (so that, we can reference the
revision that we are fetching). Later on, the data gets downloaded via `git`
and then gets sanitized until there is nothing left besides valid source files
for the host language.

Subsequently, files get parsed to the AST form offered by the host language,
and then annotated with some static knowledge, so that the computation of these
properties won't cost anything on the runtime. The annotations include node
tags (a unique identifier for a piece of AST that will be the same every time
the same structure is annotated, like tree hash), ancestral information (like a
set of 2-element tuples, where the first one points to the parent type and the
the second one points to the field that the child belongs to) and metadata
regarding the project (like the filename, project name, GitHub url). Afterward
the annotated AST gets serialized into the Index DB.

## Query Compiler

```ebnf
start                   ::= match_pattern

pattern                 ::= negate_pattern
                         | or_pattern
                         | and_pattern
                         | match_pattern
                         | sequential_pattern
                         | reference_pattern
                         | match_string_pattern
                         | atom_pattern

negate_pattern          ::= "not" pattern
or_pattern              ::= pattern "|" pattern
and_pattern             ::= pattern "&" pattern
match_pattern           ::= NAME "(" ",".argument+ ")"
sequential_pattern      ::= "[" ",".(pattern | "*" IGNORE)+ "]"
reference_pattern       ::= "~" NAME
atom_pattern            ::= NONE
                         | STRING
                         | NUMBER
                         | IGNORE
                         | "f" STRING

argument                ::= pattern
                         | NAME "=" pattern

NONE                    ::= "None"
IGNORE                  ::= "..."
NAME                    ::= "a".."Z"
NUMBER                  ::= INTEGER | FLOAT
```

The grammar above describes the ReizQL language which is embedded into the
execution engine. It can be used as is, or can be selected as a compilation
target for a higher level language that is more integrated with the syntax of
the host language.

Following query will search for all occurrences of a for loop, where the
target's `result` method is called subsequently in the loop body. The `target`
is an example of the reference pattern, which has a query-bound value (e.g if
the first `~target` capture is `X`, then the following capture is also expected
to be the same).

```
For(
    target=~target,
    body=[
        Expr(
            value=Call(
                func=Attribute(value=~target, attr="result")
            )
        )
    ],
)
```

The query in the example can be automatically generated through various forms,
as well as as can be hand written. For example, IRun project targets ReizQL
with a python superset form to be a more human friendly interface to the
engine;

```
for $target in ...:
    $target.result()
```

# Evaluation

For the limited subset of things that can be described in any of the competitor engines, we
evaluate the performance of `Reiz` by running similiar queries in Github Code Search \[@githubcodesearch\]
grep.app \[@grepapp\] and Krugle \[@krugle\] and report back the amount of true / false positives. Each
result that contains an exact match with the intended objective, e.g a call to `len(...)` function will
be counted as a true positive, and otherwise will be counted as a false positive.  Some engines offer
multiple matches per result, and they will be marked as true positive if any of them checks out with
the objective. We also discard match spans, since none of the competitors can successfully display
the expression boundaries.

Objective: search for a `len(...)` call

| engine               | query                          | true positives | false positives |
|----------------------|--------------------------------|----------------|-----------------|
| Github Code Search   | `language:python len()`        | 5              | 5               |
| grep.app             | `len\((.*)\)`                  | 10             | 0               |
| Krugle (advanced)    | `len functioncall:len`         | 10             | 0               |
| Reiz                 | `Call(Name("len"))`            | 10             | 0               |

Objective: search for an addition or a subtraction operation

| engine               | query                          | true positives | false positives |
|----------------------|--------------------------------|----------------|-----------------|
| Github Code Search   | `language:python + -`          | 0              | 0               |
| Krugle (fuzzy)       | `expr + expr` / `expr - expr`  | 0              | 0               |
| Krugle (solr syntax) | `\+ \-`                        | 2              | 8               |
| Krugle (regex syntax)| `(.*)(\+\|\-)(.*)`             | 1              | 9               |
| grep.app             | `(.*)(\+\|\-)(.*)`             | 2              | 8               |
| Reiz                 | `BinOp(op=Add() \| Sub())`     | 10             | 0               |

Objective: search for a return statement that returns a tuple `return ..., ...`

| engine               | query                          | true positives | false positives |
|----------------------|--------------------------------|----------------|-----------------|
| Github Code Search   | `language:python return ,`     | 2              | 8               |
| Krugle (solr syntax) | `return \,`                    | 1              | 9               |
| Krugle (regex syntax)| `return ((.*))(,\s*(.*))+`     | 0              | 10              |
| grep.app             | `return ((.*))(,\s*(.*))+`     | 0              | 10              |
| grep.app (2)         | `return \(((.*))(,\s*(.*))+\)` | 9              | 1               |
| Reiz                 | `Return(Tuple())`              | 10             | 0               |


## Conclusion

On all three objectives, Reiz got all the matches as true-positive due to it's nature of
being able to leverage syntax trees as well as other annotations that it could collect at
pre-processing stage (such as node boundaries to report the exact location) unlike others
where the source code is exercised like a regular textual document.

Commit message:

paper: clarify source code sampling from PyPI

paper/paper.md, after:

---
title: 'Reiz: Structural Source Code Search'
tags:
    - Python
    - source code search
    - big code
    - structure analysis
authors:
    - name: Batuhan Taskaya
      affiliation: 1
affiliations:
    - name: Python Core Developer
      index: 1

date: 21 March 2021
bibliography: paper.bib
---
# Summary

Reiz is a structural source code search engine that can execute queries written
in ReizQL to retrieve partially known syntactical constructs inside a
pre-processed source index.

# Statement of need

The fact that developers search source code every day is undeniable. This need
to search has various reasons by different groups of people. When introducing
new features to a language, developers often need to see what kind of an impact
that those will have before actually bothering to implement it (or even
discuss it in the first place). Prior to making any changes on a publicly
facing API, maintainers of those libraries do the pre-requisite work of
collecting samples and estimating the ramifications that operation might cause.
When the documentation of a framework doesn't sustain the curiosity, searching
for a structure (e.g a function, a constant) to see how it can be utilized in
real-world software is a common need among developers \[@developersearch2017\].

For the problems mentioned above, we present Reiz. A source code search engine
backend that can exercise queries to match syntax trees in order to leverage
the existing language syntax to describe partial knowledge (e.g a searching for
a `try`/ `finally` construct without knowing what is under the `try` block).

# State of the field

Popular source code search engines (e.g Github Code Search
\[@githubcodesearch\]) uses full-text search where the code is behaved not much
different than a regular textual document. Even though this approach works for
some basic queries, structurally it can't go further than matching token
sequences. This often causes seeing irrelevant search results on complex
queries, or even not being able to express the search itself in a purely
textual form. In the past, there has been some work done regarding making
queries more expressive through regular expressions (one example might
codesearch.debian.net \[@debiancodesearch\]), and even annotating the result
set with some semantical and structural knowledge (via finding and resolving
API names \[@BAJRACHARYA2014241\]).

# Method

![Stages from the Reiz's pipeline.](internals.png)

The internals consists of a pipeline that enables the ability to plug in and
out different components, such as for frontends of different languages. The
primary piece that every other component directly or indirectly interacts with
is the Index DB (a.k.a source warehouse) where the serialized AASTs (Annotated
Abstract Syntax Trees) are being held. It is based on an EdgeDB \[@edgedb\]
instance which interprets the compiled queries and returns the raw result set.
The schema used in the Index DB is in the format of ESDL (EdgeDB Schema
Definition Language) and automatically generated from the host language's ASDL
\[@asdl97\] declaration. It is a common format used by many different projects,
most notably by CPython itself.

## Sampling Source Code

Reiz is able to sample source code from a list of projects on a git remote (e.g
GitHub). The reference implementation for Reiz comes with an indexer which can
automatically construct a list for the most popular packages on PyPI,
according to the download statistics \[@hugovankemenade_richardsi_2021\]. The
list then gets cross-linked to the project's corresponding source control
platforms (so that, we can reference the revision that we are fetching). Later
on, the data gets downloaded via `git` and then gets sanitized until there is
nothing left besides valid source files for the host language.

Subsequently, files get parsed to the AST form offered by the host language,
and then annotated with some static knowledge, so that the computation of these
properties won't cost anything on the runtime. The annotations include node
tags (a unique identifier for a piece of AST that will be the same every time
the same structure is annotated, like tree hash), ancestral information (like a
set of 2-element tuples, where the first one points to the parent type and the
the second one points to the field that the child belongs to) and metadata
regarding the project (like the filename, project name, GitHub url). Afterward
the annotated AST gets serialized into the Index DB.

## Query Compiler

```ebnf
start                   ::= match_pattern

pattern                 ::= negate_pattern
                         | or_pattern
                         | and_pattern
                         | match_pattern
                         | sequential_pattern
                         | reference_pattern
                         | match_string_pattern
                         | atom_pattern

negate_pattern          ::= "not" pattern
or_pattern              ::= pattern "|" pattern
and_pattern             ::= pattern "&" pattern
match_pattern           ::= NAME "(" ",".argument+ ")"
sequential_pattern      ::= "[" ",".(pattern | "*" IGNORE)+ "]"
reference_pattern       ::= "~" NAME
atom_pattern            ::= NONE
                         | STRING
                         | NUMBER
                         | IGNORE
                         | "f" STRING

argument                ::= pattern
                         | NAME "=" pattern

NONE                    ::= "None"
IGNORE                  ::= "..."
NAME                    ::= "a".."Z"
NUMBER                  ::= INTEGER | FLOAT
```

The grammar above describes the ReizQL language which is embedded into the
execution engine. It can be used as is, or can be selected as a compilation
target for a higher level language that is more integrated with the syntax of
the host language.

Following query will search for all occurrences of a for loop, where the
target's `result` method is called subsequently in the loop body. The `target`
is an example of the reference pattern, which has a query-bound value (e.g if
the first `~target` capture is `X`, then the following capture is also expected
to be the same).

```
For(
    target=~target,
    body=[
        Expr(
            value=Call(
                func=Attribute(value=~target, attr="result")
            )
        )
    ],
)
```

The query in the example can be automatically generated through various forms,
as well as as can be hand written. For example, IRun project targets ReizQL
with a python superset form to be a more human friendly interface to the
engine;

```
for $target in ...:
    $target.result()
```

# Evaluation

For the limited subset of things that can be described in any of the competitor engines, we
evaluate the performance of `Reiz` by running similiar queries in Github Code Search \[@githubcodesearch\]
grep.app \[@grepapp\] and Krugle \[@krugle\] and report back the amount of true / false positives. Each
result that contains an exact match with the intended objective, e.g a call to `len(...)` function will
be counted as a true positive, and otherwise will be counted as a false positive.  Some engines offer
multiple matches per result, and they will be marked as true positive if any of them checks out with
the objective. We also discard match spans, since none of the competitors can successfully display
the expression boundaries.

Objective: search for a `len(...)` call

| engine               | query                          | true positives | false positives |
|----------------------|--------------------------------|----------------|-----------------|
| Github Code Search   | `language:python len()`        | 5              | 5               |
| grep.app             | `len\((.*)\)`                  | 10             | 0               |
| Krugle (advanced)    | `len functioncall:len`         | 10             | 0               |
| Reiz                 | `Call(Name("len"))`            | 10             | 0               |

Objective: search for an addition or a subtraction operation

| engine               | query                          | true positives | false positives |
|----------------------|--------------------------------|----------------|-----------------|
| Github Code Search   | `language:python + -`          | 0              | 0               |
| Krugle (fuzzy)       | `expr + expr` / `expr - expr`  | 0              | 0               |
| Krugle (solr syntax) | `\+ \-`                        | 2              | 8               |
| Krugle (regex syntax)| `(.*)(\+\|\-)(.*)`             | 1              | 9               |
| grep.app             | `(.*)(\+\|\-)(.*)`             | 2              | 8               |
| Reiz                 | `BinOp(op=Add() \| Sub())`     | 10             | 0               |

Objective: search for a return statement that returns a tuple `return ..., ...`

| engine               | query                          | true positives | false positives |
|----------------------|--------------------------------|----------------|-----------------|
| Github Code Search   | `language:python return ,`     | 2              | 8               |
| Krugle (solr syntax) | `return \,`                    | 1              | 9               |
| Krugle (regex syntax)| `return ((.*))(,\s*(.*))+`     | 0              | 10              |
| grep.app             | `return ((.*))(,\s*(.*))+`     | 0              | 10              |
| grep.app (2)         | `return \(((.*))(,\s*(.*))+\)` | 9              | 1               |
| Reiz                 | `Return(Tuple())`              | 10             | 0               |


## Conclusion

On all three objectives, Reiz got all the matches as true-positive due to it's nature of
being able to leverage syntax trees as well as other annotations that it could collect at
pre-processing stage (such as node boundaries to report the exact location) unlike others
where the source code is exercised like a regular textual document.
